It's time to take a deeper look
at the architecture of
CrateDB.
In this video, you'll learn more
about how CrateDB clusters
work and how data is stored in a
clustered environment.
We'll also take a look at the
different ways that CrateDB
can be deployed.
CrateDB is an open source
database that allows you to
store any kind of structured,
semi structured and unstructured
data in a single data store.
It offers dynamic schemas and
provides access to data via
standard SQL with support for
the Postgres Wire Protocol.
CrateDB offers the best of SQL,
NoSQL and search engines
enabling full-text and vector
similarity search to power
traditional and AI enabled
applications.
A distributed shared-nothing
architecture enables high
availability, vertical and
horizontal scaling, and high
volume concurrent reads and
writes with the distributed
query engine.
The combination of advanced
indexing and columnar storage
enables queries in single digit
milliseconds across billions of
rows of data.
CrateDB enables faster time to
market with very low operational
overhead.
Flexible deployment options
address a variety of use cases.
CrateDB is a distributed
database that uses a
shared-nothing architecture.
Each node is autonomous.
It operates independently
without relying on shared
resources.
This approach enables high
availability, vertical and
horizontal scaling, and high
volume concurrent reads and
writes.
As your data set grows or your
processing needs increase, you
can simply add more nodes to the
cluster.
CrateDB will automatically
balance the data across the
nodes, optimizing query
efficiency and simplifying
maintenance.
Let's dig deeper into the
architecture of a node in a
CrateDB cluster.
Unlike in a primary secondary
architecture, all nodes in a
CrateDB cluster are equal.
They can perform any operation.
The four major components of
each node are as follows.
The SQL handler is responsible
for incoming client requests.
The SQL handler pauses and
analysis SQL statements,
creating an execution plan.
The Job execution service
manages the execution of plans
or jobs.
Jobs, which may contain multiple
operations, are distributed by
the transport node to other
nodes involved in their
execution.
The Cluster State service
manages the cluster state.
It is responsible for master
node election and node
discovery.
Finally, the Data Storage
component.
This component handles storage
and retrieval of data from disk
based on the execution plan.
As CrateDB stores data in sharded
tables, it is divided across
multiple nodes in a cluster.
Each shard is a distinct Lucene
index stored on the file system.
Each node is accessible via 3
ports.
SQL queries are accepted and
results returned via the
Postgres Wire Protocol port or
the HTTP port.
The third port is used as a
transport port for inter cluster
communication.
For a deeper dive into node
operations, be sure to download
a copy of our architecture
guide.
As business needs grow, so do
data volumes and hardware
requirements.
When more CPU, RAM or disk
storage is needed, additional
nodes can be seamlessly added to
the CrateDB cluster.
Without manual intervention, the
cluster will automatically
rebalance the data to
accommodate the new nodes.
Here, we have a three node
cluster that's utilising around
70% of its available storage
space.
Adding a fourth node results in
an unbalanced distribution of
data.
CrateDB initiates an automatic
redistribution.
Data redistribution continues
until an almost equal level of
storage utilization is achieved
across the four nodes now making
up the enlarged cluster.
One of the key benefits of a
distributed database is the
ability to provide high
availability, crucial for always
on applications.
CrateDB allows nodes in a cluster
to be distributed across
multiple availability zones or
data centres.
CrateDB clusters exhibit self
healing characteristics.
Nodes rejoining a cluster after
a failure automatically
synchronize with the latest
data.
Let's walk through a typical
failure and recovery process.
Here, we have a cluster of three
nodes.
A node leaves the cluster,
perhaps due to hardware failure,
network partition or a rolling
maintenance task.
The data is automatically
replicated in CrateDB.
There is an automatic failover,
ensuring no loss of data despite
one node having left the
cluster.
When the node is back up, or a
new node joins the cluster to
replace it, data is
automatically synchronised and
rebalanced as necessary.
Once the data synchronisation is
complete, the node becomes fully
operational.
The cluster has recovered
autonomously without any manual
intervention required.
All tables in CrateDB are
sharded and optionally
partitioned.
This means that tables are
divided and distributed across
the nodes, forming a cluster.
Each shard in CrateDB
corresponds to a Lucene index
made of segments stored on the
file system.
These files physically reside in
one of the configured data
directories on the nodes. Lucene
only appends data to segment
files.
Data already written to disk is
never mutated.
This simplifies replication and
recovery.
Synchronising a shard becomes a
straightforward process of
fetching data from a specific
marker.
CrateDB periodically merges
segments as they grow over time.
This is an automatic process
that runs in the background, but
users can also initiate it on
demand using the OPTIMIZE TABLE
command.
See the CrateDB documentation
for more details.
Tables in CrateDB can be
divided by defining partition
columns.
This CREATE TABLE statement
creates a table to store details
of our 311 calls from the Chicago
data set.
The created date column contains
a timestamp representing the
date and time that the call was
logged.
Here we're defining a generated
column 'week' populated by
truncating the created date to
the timestamp for the start of
the week that it falls in. Now
we're telling CrateDB to
partition this table by that
generated field.
This partitions the table by
week, with CrateDB
automatically generating
partitions as needed on the fly
as data is inserted into the
table.
Partitioning tables offers
several advantages, including
flexible sharding, improved
query performance, and the
ability to backup and delete old
data in an efficient way.
For more information on
partitioning, refer to the
online documentation.
CrateDB offers a range of
deployment options, ensuring
that there's a solution that
aligns seamlessly with your
infrastructure and business
goals.
CrateDB excels in public cloud
environments, including AWS,
Azure, and Google Cloud.
This option is ideal for those
in pursuit of scalability and
flexibility.
Leveraging the public cloud
model enables CrateDB to
dynamically scale resources
based on workload demands.
This provides a cost effective
solution without requiring
upfront hardware investment.
For those seeking cloud-like
flexibility while maintaining
control of their own
environment, CrateDB can be
deployed in private clouds.
This approach combines the
advantages of cloud computing
with the privacy and security
controls of an on premises
deployment.
Organisations prioritising
security and control can deploy
CrateDB on premise.
In this model, existing
infrastructure can be utilised
and comprehensive control over
data and database management
maintained to ensure adherence
to compliance and security
protocols.
Hybrid deployments offer a
balanced solution, combining the
control and security of an on
premise system with the
scalability of the cloud.
CrateDB allows sensitive data
to be stored on premise whilst
also leveraging cloud resources
for scalable compute and
storage.
CrateDB is uniquely positioned
for edge computing environments.
Deploying CrateDB at the edge
facilitates immediate data
processing, reducing latency and
bandwidth constraints associated
with data transfer to
centralized systems.
This ensures faster insights and
decision making at the point of
data generation.
Finally, CrateDB offers support
for containerization and
orchestration tools such as
Docker and Kubernetes, enhancing
operational flexibility and
ensuring adaptability to varying
infrastructure requirements.
This video provided a high level
overview of the architecture of
CrateDB.
To learn more, including how
CrateDB handles replication,
atomicity, and consistency,
download a copy of the
comprehensive Architecture guide
from our website.